And as we have heard, a number
of patient groups and major
players in the health care
industry have opposed
the Senate bill.
Every major hospital
group has criticized it.
They say they are especially
worried about deep reductions
in Medicaid spending for the
poor and those with
disabilities, changes
that include new limits
like spending caps
or block grants that would
eventually cut the number
of people on Medicaid.
Hospitals say they will end
up paying the difference
by treating the uninsured.
While I was in Colorado for the
Aspen Spotlight Health Festival
last week, I spoke with Kenneth
Davis.
He's president and CEO of the
Mount Sinai Health System,
which includes seven hospitals
and more than 140
ambulatory centers and
practices in New York.
Dr. Ken Davis, thank you very
much for talking with us.
You were quoted recently as
commenting on the House version
of the Republican overhaul
of the Affordable Care Act.
You said it would have
a fairly devastating
effect on the country.
Is that the way you feel
about the Senate version too?
DR.
KENNETH DAVIS, President
and CEO, Mount Sinai
Health System: Absolutely.
I think, if anything, there are
aspects of the Senate bill that
can be even more problematic.
Particularly, the glide path
to per capita or block grants
is going to produce a lower
reimbursement for the states
than was even in the House bill.
JUDY WOODRUFF: What about
the effect on hospitals?
DR.
KENNETH DAVIS: Well, there
are a number of things
that impact hospitals.
All of them collectively,
particularly for hospitals that
have a reasonable number of
Medicaid patients,
are pretty difficult.
There are substantial cuts.
For instance, the public
hospitals -- the Health and
Hospital Corporation in New York
City, they can't possibly
sustain these cuts to
the Medicaid budget.
Other hospitals that
have a large number of
Medicaid patients have
a very tiny margin.
That margin evaporates
with this bill.
JUDY WOODRUFF: And is that
-- even with tweaking,
you're saying there's
literally no way around?
DR.
KENNETH DAVIS: Well,
fundamentally, this
bill is about decreasing
Medicaid and decreasing
what states receive for
Medicaid and decreasing,
in the House case, those
who have the extended
benefits or the eligibility that
they previously didn't have.
The bill isn't that much
around tweaks to Obamacare.
It's a little bit.
It's a bit to tweak the
exchanges, but the money's
coming from Medicaid.
And unless they take
a completely different
approach to Medicaid,
I don't see that tweaks
are going to help.
JUDY WOODRUFF: So, there are
observers of the health care
system who look at all this,
and they say hospitals are
a big part of the problem.
They're consolidating.
There are mergers.
Doctors are cutting
deal with hospitals.
Everybody's making more money.
Hospitals are charging more.
What could hospitals do that
they aren't doing now to get
some of these costs down?
DR.
KENNETH DAVIS: Well,
let's remember all
hospitals are not alike.
In many cases, geography
is destiny in hospitals.
So if you're in a system like
ours, in which the vast majority
of our payments are either
Medicaid or Medicare,
that's fixed.
And the size of our hospital
system isn't going to change
how much Medicaid reimbursement
or Medicare
reimbursement we get.
Additionally, as some systems
have increased in size, they
have done so in order that they
can move away from
fee-for-service medicine
to what's called value.
To do that, to be a system
that can take risk and value,
you have to be large enough so
that patients don't
escape your network.
And that's part of the thing
that is driving consolidation.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Is enough
being done, you think,
to be mindful of costs?
DR.
KENNETH DAVIS: Well, the margins
in many hospitals are so small
that, if you are not fixated
on costs, you are bankrupt.
And in New York state, we
have seen 30-plus hospitals
go bankrupt in recent years.
JUDY WOODRUFF: So the lesson is?
DR.
KENNETH DAVIS: The lesson is,
we are focused on expenses.
We have to be
fixated on expenses.
But what we really need to do
-- and we were trying to do
this previously -- and hopefully
we can continue to do this
-- is ask, how can we deliver
health care in a different,
more efficient,
cost-efficient way?
The system is failing us.
The macroeconomics of
health care are such
that the government can't
afford it, the states
can't afford it, the employers
can't afford it, and the
employees can't afford it.
What we have got to ask is,
what's wrong with the system
and how do we change it so that
it's more efficient
for everybody?
JUDY WOODRUFF: You
brought up Medicaid.
You were saying how much of this
legislation is around Medicaid.
There are many who say that
the Medicaid expansion that
was part of the Affordable
Care Act originally,
which I know you were
strongly for, the critics
say this was simply throwing
money at an inefficient
program, poor-quality care,
people on Medicaid don't get the
same level of care that others
do.
And they point to studies
showing that, even with the
expansion of Medicaid, that that
care is not getting much better.
How do you respond?
DR.
KENNETH DAVIS: Well, those
studies or study doesn't
take a very long perspective.
You can't see the difference
in things like mortality
for quite some time.
If you're lowering
people's hemoglobin A1c
or better controlling
their blood pressure,
it can take sometimes years
before you see an extension of
a lifespan in those patients.
But what we did find,
what was reported was an
improvement in mental health.
And it seems like people
have forgotten that.
The largest provider of
payment for addiction
services is Medicaid.
Twenty percent of all Medicaid
recipients, at the very least,
have mental health problems.
To take that out of the equation
is very, very destructive.
And to think that we're not
having a positive influence --
because the only thing we really
directly affect and that
we can measure short-term
is improvement in mental
health -- is a little
demeaning to our psychiatrists.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Let me go back
to the mega-question about our
whole -- our health care system.
What conservatives are arguing,
among other things, is that
when you have health care,
rising costs of health care
driving at least a sixth of the
economy, that something's really
out of whack, that the whole
system is too expensive,
too out of control.
Government participating
in it is helping to
drive up those costs.
Do they have a point?
DR.
KENNETH DAVIS: Not really.
We lose money on every Medicaid
patient who walks through our
door, whether it's inpatient
or outpatient.
That's the cost of health care.
If they were truly interested
in the question of why is our
system so expensive, this would
be a bill about how we move
away from fee-for-service
medicine, in which
physicians and hospitals
get paid for everything they
do, and moving more toward value
and risk, in which patients,
providers are all aligned, such
that everyone wants you to stay
well and out of the hospital.
We would have more incentives
for readmission penalties.
We would have incentives
for shorter stay.
We would have more incentives to
bring care to a less expensive
place, like the ambulatory
setting.
But those issues aren't
being addressed in this bill.
JUDY WOODRUFF: And your
point is conservatives may
make that argument, but
they're not promoting...
DR.
KENNETH DAVIS: If they are
truly interested in changing
the cost structure, making it
more efficient and less
expensive, they have
got to deal with reforms
that actually affect
those metrics.
And these don't.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Dr. Ken Davis,
we thank you very much.
DR.
KENNETH DAVIS: Thank you.